---
title: "Francisco Coll’s Cello Concerto"
subtitle: "Program Notes for the UK Premiere at the BBC Proms"
pubDate: 2024-08-18
headerImg: ./header.jpg
originalPub:
  publisher: BBC Proms
tags:
  - notas-al-programa
  - concierto
  - orquesta
  - estreno
  - siglo-xxi
---

Seen today through the prism of Francisco Coll’s _Cello Concerto_, it seems
clear that the confinement brought about by the outbreak of the Covid-19
pandemic, far from leading the composer to a situation of creative torpor or
lack of stimulus, became a catalyst for a sudden intensification of some of the
evolutionary processes that were already underway in his music of the previous
few years. As this _Cello Concerto_ demonstrates, the pieces composed by Coll
since the start of the current decade embody a significant increase in his
striving for a more conscious and economic writing, purged of unnecessary
elements that might hinder the music’s communicative power. One of the most
notable consequences of this trend in this work – which also marks a
considerable evolution with respect to any of his previous symphonic
_concertante_ pieces – is the deployment of a highly spacious orchestration, at
times with a chamber-like character, which allows for a striking predominance of
moments where the cello and orchestra can play simultaneously while remaining
perfectly balanced.

Since its four movements are played without a break, and given that the middle
two share closely related material, Coll’s _Cello Concerto_ can be regarded as
one substantial, lyrical and expressive slow movement, framed by two shorter,
rhythmically driven ones. The first and shortest of them is built on an
irregular _ostinato_ presented by the cello, who playfully slides with, between
and against the orchestra’s regular pulse ‘like a mischievous child’. The two
central sections, mournful and melancholic in character, delve into Coll’s
particular notion of contradictory beauty and eroticism through an extensive use
of the instrument’s most idiomatic expressive resources. As a notable moment,
the fleeting appearance of a macabre, hallucinogenic ‘elastic’ waltz in the
middle of the second movement highlights the mixed connotations that this form
has acquired in the composer’s work since its first appearance in _Mural_
(2013–15). Following a brief solo _cadenza_ which explores some of the
instrument’s polyphonic resources, the climactic closing movement bursts in as a
sort of irregular festive dance of great technical virtuosity, at times
reminiscent of some of Bartók’s rhythmic and modal treatments, with the soloist
enveloped in a bright, metallic orchestration.

Coll’s _Cello Concerto_, with its distinctive attributes, aims to capture the
musical and human personality of its dedicatee, Sol Gabetta – much as his 2019
_Violin Concerto_ served as a musical portrait of Patricia Kopatchinskaja – with
whom the composer has maintained a rewarding artistic relationship since 2017.
Other works written by the composer for the Argentinian cellist include his duo
for violin and cello _Rizoma_ (2017), the double concerto for violin, cello and
chamber orchestra _Les plaisirs illuminés_ (2018) and his recently recorded duo
for cello and piano _Dialog ohne Worte_ (2021).
