---
title: "The beauty of bringing opposites together"
pubDate: 2021-05-21
headerImg: ./header.jpg
originalPub:
  publisher: Pentatone
  url: https://www.philharmonie.lu/en/philplus/coll-orchestral-works
tags:
  - notas-al-programa
  - album
  - orquesta
  - siglo-xxi
---

At the end of 2016, Patricia Kopatchinskaja and Gustavo Gimeno found themselves
on a train on their way to a concert in Valencia. It so happened that Francisco
Coll – who had left his hometown ten years earlier – had also travelled there to
spend a weekend with his family. Kopatchinskaja was interested in getting to
know Coll’s music, so during the journey Gimeno showed her a recording of his
_Hyperlude IV_ for solo violin. She liked it so much that she played it as an
encore at her concert that very night. Since then, the collaboration between the
two has continued to bear fruit: _Rizoma_, _Les plaisirs illuminés – Double
Concerto_, _LalulaLied_ and the _Violin Concerto_ are the works that Coll has
written for Kopatchinskaja in recent years, each piece demonstrating that their
two personalities – as different as they are – vibrate together with a very
special intensity.

In appreciation, Coll has dedicated to her his _Violin Concerto_, without doubt
one of his most ambitious and most accomplished works. The concerto is
intimately linked to the figure of Kopatchinskaja, not only because in its
second movement he quotes his own _Hyperlude IV_ – the work which brought them
together –, but also because the whole piece is in a sense a portrait of the
violinist: from the explosive fury of the first movement, through the sensuality
of the second, to the youthful and unpredictable character of the third.

A joint commission from the Orchestre Philharmonique du Luxembourg and
Philharmonie Luxembourg, the London Symphony, the Seattle Symphony, the NTR
ZaterdagMatinee and the Bamberger Symphoniker – and premiered in Luxembourg
barely a month before the start of the Covid-19 pandemic in Europe –, the
_Violin Concerto_ is the consummation of many of the concerns that Coll had been
exploring in the previous years, regarding his relationship with the
distillation of complexity and his interest in boldly taking on the problems of
tradition, a process which he had begun in 2013 with _Mural_. But above all, the
work is a constant exploration of limits and extremes. As in all his music, the
instability that runs through the piece is the result of a union of opposites.
And in the _Violin Concerto_, the past and the present converge in a single
space; the superficial and the profound entry into mutual contradiction; the
most delicate expressiveness melts with the most extreme violence, creating a
mysterious and polymorphic beauty: excessive, perverse, closely related to
decomposition, but above all, beauty as a manifestation of instability.

This attraction towards instability, extremes and the union of opposing or
conflicting elements has been a constant in his work from the beginning. One of
the first compositions in which he attempted to represent these contradictions
was _Hidd’n Blue_, a short and schizophrenic orchestral overture written soon
after arriving in London in 2008, right at the beginning of the financial
crisis. _Hidd’n Blue_ was premiered by the London Symphony Orchestra and
François-Xavier Roth at LSO St Luke’s, and one year later was presented to a
larger audience in the Barbican Hall under the direction of Coll’s mentor,
Thomas Adès. Since then, it has been programmed by orchestras around the world,
to the point that it has become one of his most frequently performed pieces. In
it, through an accelerated narrative rhythm, a play of sonic extremes and the
overlaying of different rhythmic patterns, Coll warns us of the hysteria and the
contradictions of our time, showing us that all the instability present in his
music is not a mere whim, but rather a kind of social portrait. However, beneath
all this chaos runs a sort of illusory canon, a contaminated form of beauty
which seems to want to forge a path into noise, but which at the same time is
nothing more than a ghostly appearance composed of dust and residues. When one
emerges from the depths of _Hidd’n Blue_, the image one returns with is one of
blurred memory, a diffuse image, a remnant; the image in ruins. It is not
possible to reconstruct the canon, perhaps because it was never actually there.

However, it was not until _Mural_ that Coll started exploring consciously his
interest in ruins. The work, which can be understood as a symphony in five
movements, was commissioned jointly by the Orchestre Philharmonique du
Luxembourg and Philharmonie Luxembourg, the National Youth Orchestra of Great
Britain and the Palau de les Arts Reina Sofía, and premiered by the first of
those in 2016, also under the baton of Gimeno, to whom the piece is dedicated.
If _Hidd’n Blue_ was then an attempt to portray his present, in _Mural_ that
present enters directly into a dialogue with the past. Not for nothing was it
presented by the BBC Proms as a «grotesque symphony», since in it traditional
dances, quasi-tonal progressions, canons, fugues and quotations from composers
of the past coexist with obsessive rhythms, scrap-metal percussion and other
elements of pop culture, among many caricatures and hidden jokes. Far from being
glorified in the romantic way, the fragments of tradition that appear here seem
to have been salvaged out of the rubble, always with that disturbance of the
contemporary on their surfaces. But just as in _Hidd’n Blue_ or the _Violin
Concerto_, its beauty is only possible thanks to that same residual noise that
constantly destabilizes it. In _Mural_, Coll treats history as just another
malleable material, taking its vestiges in order to build with them something
completely different: a «mural» of heterogeneous images which are related to
each other through a fragmentary rhetoric, and brought together by means of a
unique and mysterious sense of humour.

Also illusory – and irreverently humorous – is the folkloric world of his _Four
Iberian Miniatures_. As the piece progresses, the initial strums of a jota give
way to fandango rhythms and flamenco clapping, or a strange ternary tango ends
up turning into Lorca’s «Anda jaleo». The hallucinogenic, delirious quality of
the universe created by Coll here is a perfect match for Kopatchinskaja’s
violin: satirical and brazen, full of broken continuities, formless objects and
other irrational logics that belong to a dream. While there were traces of folk
elements in his music before, Coll’s real engagement with the music of his
native country began in 2013 with this piece. Just like the freedom of
imagination preached by the surrealists, the folklore of the _Four Iberian
Miniatures_ does not faithfully correspond to the styles of flamenco or the
formal structures of the music it alludes to; it is, instead, largely invented.
It is a distilled folklore, reduced to its essence, which Coll uses freely –
just as he does with the ruins of tradition in _Mural_ – to build his own
universe.

The album finishes with his Opus 1, _Aqua Cinerea_, the work that led to his
departure from Spain a little more than a decade ago. He wrote it in 2005 – with
only 19 years old – and it was premiered one year later at the Palau de la
Música in Valencia with Cristóbal Soler and the Orquestra Filharmònica de la
Universitat de València – the orchestra in which, incidentally, Coll himself
played the trombone. Coll sent the recording of that premiere to Thomas Adès,
who, impressed by the maturity and freshness of his ideas, invited him to study
with him in London, as his only student. _Aqua Cinerea_ was, indeed, the
beginning of everything: not just of his professional career, but also of
everything he would come to explore in his subsequent works. In its pages,
spontaneously and intuitively, can be found his whole world in concentrated
form, poured out raw onto the paper. This is why _Aqua Cinerea_ could be
considered, in many aspects, the most vivid and genuine reflection of his
personality. When writing his _Violin Concerto_ fifteen years later, perhaps he
had in mind the spirit that flows through _Aqua Cinerea_, because during the
creative process he was constantly repeating to himself: «Don’t try to please a
conservative public or the institutionalised avant-garde; just write what you
hear and dare to fail.» And Coll is, certainly, an artist who, like
Kopatchinskaja or Gimeno, not only can, but – more than that – dares.

(English translation from Spanish by Natalie Shea)
